---
id: 7
title: COM S 402
slug: com-s-402
date: 'December 21, 2022'
img: 'feature-images/cs-department-hardware.png'
tags:
  - University Course
  - AWS
---

Oh boy, another project-based class! Those are always fun, right? \
**Wrong.**

<!--more-->

Now that's a bit bleak, but it's how I felt right from the start of the semester. Before the semester started, I was looking forward to the class because project-based courses are pretty much the only time I walk away feeling that I learned something useful while at university. \
Don't get me wrong, studying the theory of why some random mathematical statement is true is cool and all, but it's not really useful when building software.

I enjoy building things, so I was looking forward to the class.

<!-- On the first day we were given a few project choices, as well as offered to create our own idea (with approval). There was only one project choice that peaked my interest. The project titled "Smart Posters" seemed like a cool idea. In summary the idea was to implement QR codes into (digital and physical). When a user scanned the QR code to learn more about an event/topic, the poster's creator would be able to track analytics such as which poster had the most user interaction. This would help someone in future promoting. \
Also, the project seemed quite simple and that it could benefit from being cloud-based, which was really important to me at the time.

We all voted for our top picks and waited a couple of days. The group I was in received our second pick, a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) organizer.
-->

The project that my group ended up with was a [Standard Operating Procedure](https://g.co/kgs/boL3hv) (SOP) organizer.

### SOP Organizer
The proposal for SOP Organizer defined it as a barebones version of Google Drive, specifically like Google Docs. Labs at ISU needed a centralized location where SOP documents were stored and easily accessible. This is the core "problem" the project was aimed at solving.


#### Tech Stack
When it came time to pick a tech stack, almost everyone in our group had some experience with JavaScript. Someone suggested using JavaScript for both the frontend and backend, and we were all on board. I suggested [NuxtJS](https://nuxtjs.org/) for the frontend and [ExpressJS](https://expressjs.com/) for the API. Lastly, we used MySQL for the database.

The "bottleneck" in the tech stack was the hardware. \
We had first met with our client to discuss project requirements and the tech stack. This was when we suggested hosting the project in AWS. We were met with an immediate "no," saying that we should rely on the Virtual Machine (VM) allocated for the semester. **This is where things started becoming difficult.**
<!-- Another little note is that I proposed test-driven-development, and was pretty much told "No" again. Why would you want to test your code? ðŸ˜ -->


I won't further discuss the frontend/backend development since it was nothing extraordinary. This part of the development was fairly straightforward and a great collaborative experience. \
If you're interested in seeing the messy monolithic repo, visit [this GitHub repository](https://github.com/biochenistry/sop-organizer).

### Why we should have just hosted it in the cloud
As I mentioned earlier, the VM was the tech stack's bottleneck. This is for several reasons. Without going too in-depth, I'll list the major problems we ran into because of the VM. I'll also include how this would be resolved with AWS. \
**Note:** IaC = Infrastructure as Code

1. Standing up a MySQL database
    - **VM:** Requires manual installation, account creation, etc
    - **Cloud:** IaC & CI/CD solves this (RDS, Account creation with a tool like Flyway)
1. Hosting the static frontend
    - **VM:** Hosting another webserver to serve frontend
    - **Cloud:** IaC solves this (S3 + Cloudfront)
1. Virtual machine is only accessible within ISU Network
    - **VM:** Completely out of our control
    - **Cloud:** Not a problem
1. Exposed ports
    - **VM:** Completely out of our control
    - **Cloud:** Completely in our control (IaC, VPC)
1. Putting a domain in front of our website
    - **VM:** Very time-consuming manual work
    - **Cloud:** IaC solves this (Route53 + Cloudfront)
1. Acquiring a certificate for secure (encrypted) HTTP traffic
    - **VM:** Very time-consuming manual work
    - **Cloud:** IaC solves this (ACM)
1. Scalability
    - **VM:** Not possible
    - **Cloud:** Possible
<!--
1. TEXT
    - **VM:** 
    - **Cloud:** IaC solves this
-->


### Takeaways

I don't want to just nag about how we weren't able to host the project in the cloud. Besides, overall the project was a big success. By the end of the semester, we had achieved almost everything our client requested.

I will say that unlike previous project-based courses (such as [COM-S-309](/blog/com-s-309)), there was almost no overhead in 402. Really there were only occasional meetings with the course instructor to ensure everyone was on track. We really had the entire semester to design and develop an application. Personally, it was not a great technological learning experience. However, it was a great lesson on how painful the development process can become when things are hosted on-premises. \
I walked away from the class with a greater appreciation for the cloud.

