---
id: 9
title: Two Birds, One Stone
slug: com-s-490
date: 'April 29, 2023'
img: 'feature-images/IMG_0341.png'
tags:
  - University Course
  - AWS
---

I wanted a light workload for my last semester of Computer Science at ISU. I wanted to focus as much time as I could on working.

Unfortunately, I needed to complete two more 400-level COM S courses.

Luckily, ***I created a way to earn 400-level COM S credit while getting cloud certified.***

<!--more-->

### The problem
Tragically, Iowa State's Computer Science department is severely lacking in teaching modern technologies. This is especially true for [cloud computing](/cloud), where there are currently **zero** cloud-related courses. Considering how important the cloud has become, this is incredibly disappointing.

### The solution
Fortunately, I realized I could take an independent study course (COM S 490) and self-direct my learning. Moreover, I figured this would be a wonderful time to become certified with my favorite cloud provider, Amazon Web Services (AWS).

In this post, I'll outline the *trials and tribulations* of arranging this special course and what achieving two professional-level AWS certifications was like.

---

### Trials and tribulations
#### Getting credit
This. Is. Frustrating. \
First, let me clarify that when I signed up for this course, I was advised **by the faculty** that the course meets the criteria for a 400-level COM S course.

Unfortunately, **COM S 490 does not count as a 400-level COM S credit** according to the Computer Science department. Yes, I know: That makes absolutely no sense.

This came to my surprise nearly a month into the semester. So, imagine it's your last semester, and things are going well. Then one day, you receive an email saying you are not on track to graduate. ***What the f\*\*\*?***

Luckily, all it took was a (meticulous) petition to mark my specific instance of COM S 490 as a 400-level COM S course.

***\*sigh\****. Oh well.

On to what actually matters...

#### Choosing certifications
The first challenge I faced in the course was determining which AWS Certifications to work towards. I've only been working with AWS for a little over a year, so I initially planned to strive for the introductory certifications:
- Cloud Practitioner
- Solutions Architect Associate
- DevOps Engineer Associate

Before jumping into the material, I talked with a colleague from work. She advised that I skip these exams and go for the professional-level certifications. This means that I would instead earn only two certificates:

- Solutions Architect Professional (SAP)
- DevOps Engineer Professional

I'm incredibly grateful for this conversation, as it ended up being a more rewarding challenge. And I really mean that it was challenging. \
So challenging, in fact, that I failed both exams before retaking and earning the certificates.

#### The exams
Maybe I'm the only one that thinks this, but sitting in front of a computer for 3 hours, with the inability to get up to take short breaks (even to use the restroom), is not pleasant.

The professional-level exams are three hours long and have 75 questions. That means test-takers only have a couple of minutes for each question. Beware that the questions on the professional-level exams feel like they contain as many words as one of my blog posts (seriously, the problems are ***wordy***).

With these arduous conditions, I failed my first attempt on both certification exams. However, I passed on my second attempt for each certification.

I've had enough certification exams for a while.

---

Altogether, my independent study was far more valuable and interesting than the alternatives.

See the certifications below.

<div class="flex flex-wrap md:flex-nowrap justify-center gap-2">
  <div class="bg-card-light w-auto rounded-md">
    <div data-iframe-width="300" data-iframe-height="270" data-share-badge-id="cecbb8c9-aa18-456f-beed-4d7a4bdef53b" data-share-badge-host="https://www.credly.com"></div><script type="text/javascript" async src="//cdn.credly.com/assets/utilities/embed.js"></script>
  </div>
  <div class="bg-card-light w-auto rounded-md">
    <div data-iframe-width="300" data-iframe-height="270" data-share-badge-id="07e84d2a-1142-4215-b7aa-c20f34da2003" data-share-badge-host="https://www.credly.com"></div><script type="text/javascript" async src="//cdn.credly.com/assets/utilities/embed.js"></script>
  </div>
</div>

